---
title: Idea Dump
subtitle: Ideas are cheap. Making things is hard.

date: 2017-01-07
slug: idea-dump
image:
    url: 'https://docs.astro.build/assets/rose.webp'
    alt: 'The Astro logo on a dark background with a pink glow.'
---

In no particular order, a list of ideas floating around my head:

## Photo/video/art

**Tintype lab** Would it be possible to use an HD projector to make tin type copies of digital photographs? Would require preprocessing the images to boost the contrast at he very least I suspect.

**Tri color** Create photoshop actions to recreate the triple exposure prints of  Sergei Mikhailovich Prokudin-Gorskii (
[LOC Archive](http://www.loc.gov/exhibits/empire/gorskii.html),
[wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sergey_Prokudin-Gorsky),
[Boston Globe](http://archive.boston.com/bigpicture/2010/08/russia_in_color_a_century_ago.html)
). Would use three consecutive images taken a few seconds apart which uses the movement between images to create interesting visual artifacts between the channels. Might be particularly interesting with dance photos. Would also be a pretty cool phone app based on Live photos or similar.

**Fuck Cancer** Non-profit which partners with various artists to make lovely "Fuck Cancer" prints ala 20x200 and similar. All proceeds go to a patient or family fighting or recovering from cancer.

**Backdrop Dance Video** Modern dance video with a very simple setup. Would start with very close video of face, hands, feet. Dancer would appear to be in front of a simple black  backdrop. But the camera would very slowly start panning back. Eventually, the viewer would see the dancer in front of a smallish backdrop, but in the context of various interesting environments. Video would be interesting on two levels: first the dancers themselves. But then various locales would add conferrable interest: theaters, creepy basements, boring corporate environments, Guthrie "Bridge to Nowhere" with panning on a drone over the river, some claustrophobic spaces, other wide open spaces.

**2200 ink** Hack my old Epson for overprinting metallic and alternative insets.

**42** Vanity photo book of my favorite photos I'm made over the years. Try to sell enough prints to pay for a nice photo printer.

**Awkward Brochures** Nicely produced trifold brochures for awkward conversations: "you need to shower more", "let's talk about bad breath", "I'm leaving you", etc.

**photo decay** start with a photo and slowly deteriorate it. Add CV so faces fade out last. Include glitches as well.

## Web sites

**1968-1973** List of all the incredible music which happened in these six years.

**Record Collection** Similar to above, a little one page app of all my favorite records. Also include printed versions of the info which I should slip into the sleeve and reference when I'm flipping through the collection.

**MN Atlas** Create an atlas of MN and the nearby region based on all the various open data bits available on the web. Less about making them really explorable with pan/zoom maps, and more about using D3 to have solid infographics. Bonus points for scripts which can updated the data as needed.

**roaddiet.mn** advocacy site with background and case studies about road diets.

**mpls arch** simple photo site of good/bad/ugly/notable buildings in Minneapolis/St Paul. From Christ Church Lutheran, to the big West Bank towers, Guthrie, skyways, etc. Long term hobby project that would let me have a reason to go out and shoot for the day.

## Web Apps

**Ranked lists of events**. Users use their karma to spread a certain number of votes over upcoming music and dance events. Meant to be a light, curated list that makes it obvious what is coming up and get more signal out of the noise.

**Twitter Reviews** Use convention for mini reviews of movies that are could then be scraped from the twitter API.

**Artist Portfolio** Dead simple single page dancer/music/band websites ala [linneamohn.com](http://linneamohn.com)

**Random Beacon API** Wrap an simple API around the [NIST randomness beacon](https://www.nist.gov/programs-projects/nist-randomness-beacon), for better usability and preserve the history.

**Number station** Use Random beacon to create a spoof on shortwave number stations, either with audio or list a austere, creepy list of random numbers.

**Pick a number** playful single page app where friends can do "pick a number between 1 and 100" type questions to settle arguments and make decisions. `/dev/urandom` would work fine, too, I guess, but using the beacon would be more fun and have a history.

**Record Labels** enter a discogs master or release ID, get a nicely formatted letter sized LP label which would wrap around the spine.

**Tides** Why are all tides websites terrible? Build a better one with nice UI.

**Watch face** SVG animation of watch faces

**History clock** power of 10-esque clock with different order of magnitude scales from minutes to days to years to centuries, etc.


## Blog Posts

**Gas prices** History of Minneapolis gas prices, my usage per degree day, etc. Contact Centerpoint to get historic rates. Compare to price of oil, electricity.

**X-T2 Usage Notes** Braindump of notes from using the X-T2

## Mobile Apps

**Home list** To-do list which automatically screen shots and makes it the background of the lock screen. Or maybe a share-sheet based app to do this already exists.

## House stuff

**Record console** Buy an old record console from Craigslist and update to it modern components. Bonus points for a place to stash booze.

**Glockenspiel doorbell** Use a Teensy, used glockenspiel, and solenoids to play MIDI files. Use as clock and doorbell and general noise maker. Bonus points for huge bass metal tube hanging floor to ceiling.

## Neighborhood stuff

**Residential parklets** Expand the commercial parklet program to allow Minneapolis residents to create a little park/greenspace in the parking spot in front of their house.

**No parking buffers** Use big potted plants or other greenery to demarcate no parking zones in front of stop signs and fire hydrants. Would create visual buffers to narrow the traffic a bit and slow down traffic.

## Bike

**Wheel lights** Install right and white LED strips on the inside of the Pugsley rims. Bonus points for accelerometer for fancier effects.

## Miscellaneous

**Front light** put a basic timer on the front yard light so it turns on before sundown and stays on (but slowly fades) until midnight. Bonus points for a range detector which could detect people on the sidewalk and increase the brightness.

**Finish Things** installation with EL wire. Or maybe it is better as a cross-stitch.

**Socket Transformer** a AC to DC transformer which plugs into a light socket with 5 volt and 3.3 volt output.
